Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we've been looking
at the weaknesses of real numbers a lot of you
will be wondering which way should I go personally
should I believe Norman should I go with the
majority how do I tell whether what is being
presented here is actually correct or not well
I hope that there is some internal logic to what
I'm saying that what I'm saying sounds reasonable
and that you can understand the logic and the
reasons for what I'm trying to convince you
of but in addition we could say well how can we
sort of decide whether the current theory of real
numbers really works aside from just listening
to Norman well one possible answer is that we
can look at standard textbooks and see if their
treatments hold up in fact we have an obligation
to do this we have an obligation to have a look
at how standard textbooks tackle the difficulties
and can they actually surmount the difficulties
can they present a proper theory of real numbers
that's convincing and complete if they can
well then I should retract my position and we
can all go back to the happy situation that we had
previously so in today's video what we're going to
do is we're going to look at some textbooks some
calculus textbooks and some analysis textbooks and
these are all taken from my personal library so I
have lots of books and in particular I have books
on calculus classical texts and I have books on
analysis and we're going to have a look at some
of these texts and I would like to emphasize
that even though we are going to be pointing
out weaknesses and deficiencies in these books I
don't want this to be taken as a personal attack
on the authors of these books all of the books
I'm presenting to you here our in my opinion very
good books okay they have a lot to recommend
them it's not that they in particular have
logical weaknesses with regard to real numbers
what I claim is that this logical weakness is
essentially uniform across the entire discipline
it wouldn't matter which books I presented to you
we would all find the similar kind of situation
so the fact that I'm going to show you a book
already means that I hold it in high esteem if I
don't respect this book I'm not even going to show
it to you all right so let's have a look at some
books and they're not selective I'm not interested
in cherry-picking the examples that support my
thesis and ignoring the ones that don't we'll see
that in fact there are some books that really
try to tackle this issue and the question of
whether they're successful or not will be a very
interesting and important one all right so I'm
going to roll up the sleeves we'll open the books
we're going to see how does modern mathematics
actually in practice deal with the issue of real
numbers alright so here are the first books that
wouldn't have a look at we're going to start with
book calculus by James Stewart and this is one of
the most successful calculus textbooks of all time
okay so let's have a look to see what Stewart does
in terms of introducing the real numbers all
right so the first thing we can do is we could
look at the table of contents and we look to see
whether there's a section on real numbers or you
know basic orientation to the foundations and
the first chapters on functions and models and
then limits and rates of change derivatives and so
on we look through we don't actually see directly
any section that deals with real numbers okay but
wait a minute at the end in the appendix a2 we can
some thing that's in this direction so let's have
a look at the appendix all right so Appendix A
called intervals inequalities and absolute values
starts talking about number systems okay I'm not
going to read it all to you but I'm going to
give you the basic idea so calculus is based
on the real number system is the first statement
we start with the integers then we construct the
rational numbers and I'm skipping sections and
then it says some real numbers such as root 2
can't be expressed as a ratio of integers and
are therefore called irrational numbers it can be
shown with varying degrees of difficulty that the
following are also irrational numbers square root
of 3 square root of 5 cube root of 2 pi sine of
1 log of 2 the set of all real numbers is usually
denoted by the symbol R when we use the word
number without qualification we mean real number
and then he talks about decimal representations
that every number has a decimal representation it
talks about repeating decimals and unrepeated or
non repeating decimals in the case of say root 2
or pi he talks a little bit about the real numbers
can be represented by points on the line and
coordinates real number line he states that
the real numbers are ordered and then there's
a discussion of sets so the long and short of
it that is everything is appearing on this one
page essentially we have a quick introduction
of rational numbers and then the real numbers
are basically just assumed to exist there's no
real attempt to define what a real number is so
we're going to have to say that Stewart does
not attempt to define the real numbers and so
the definition certainly is not satisfactory
let's move to the calculus textbook called
calculus by Salas Hilla and Oetken which is the
textbook that we here at the university of new
south wales have used for many years alright so
i quote it a little bit about this on my recent
debate with Jim Franklin I'll do that again
so here the real numbers are introduced on
first chapter and page for this section called
real numbers and what does it say our study of
calculus is based on the real number system the
real number system consists of the set of real
numbers together with the familiar arithmetic
operations addition subtraction multiplication
division and certain other properties which are
reviewed briefly here and then there's a list
of types of numbers natural numbers integers some
rational numbers irrational numbers examples root
2 cubed root 7 pi the solutions of the equation x
squared minus 5 equals 0 then there's discussion
of the decimal representations of numbers either
being repeating or not repeating and the geometric
representation on a line and the various ordered
properties so there's no attempt at actually
defining what a real number is so clearly these
authors along with Stewart are assuming that the
reader basically already understands what real
numbers are so we're going to have to say that
no real numbers are not defined and certainly this
definition is not satisfactory how about a look at
the recent textbook of Rogalski quite a nice book
called calculus and let's have a look to see how
john Rogowski approaches things well he certainly
starts off directly talking about this issue so
on the first page precalculus review this is a
review so I say start saying calculus builds on
the foundation of algebra analytic geometry
and trigonometry in this chapter therefore
we review some concepts facts and formulas from
precalculus that are used throughout the text the
first section is real numbers functions and graphs
we begin with a short discussion of real numbers
this gives us the opportunity to recall some basic
properties and standard notation so a real number
is a number represented by a decimal or decimal
expansion he has a real number in bold here so
this is his definition of what a real number is
it's a number represented by a decimal or decimal
expansion in quotes there are three types of
decimal expansions finite repeating and infinite
but non repeating for example and then the non
repeating one is pi the set of all real numbers
is denoted by a boldface are not real number is
called rational if it can be represented by P over
Q we can tell where the number is rational from
its decimal expansion now here they talk about the
absolute value and we go on to order properties
and intervals is this really a definition of real
numbers well he has got real number in bold and
he has said that it's going to be a decimal or
decimal expansion so I think we can say that yes
he has made an attempt perhaps not very convincing
but he has made an attempt to define real numbers
is this definition satisfactory certainly it's not
no attempt has been made to tell us what kind
of infinite decimals are allowed whether we're
talking about choice or algorithms no mention has
been made of the arithmetic of real numbers and
how we may establish the laws of arithmetic
and in particular the various problems that
I talked about when we're talking about infinite
decimals are completely ignored so the definition
is certainly not satisfactory let's go back in
time maybe earlier generations were more careful
or concerned with the issue let's have a look at
important book differential and integral calculus
by Courant this is 1934 there is differential and
integral calculus not quite as glossy with as many
pictures but still a good book all right so on
chapter 1 introduction hi he starts in section
one with the continuum of numbers the question
as to the real nature of numbers is one which
concerns philosophers more than mathematicians
and philosophers have been much occupied with it
well this is interesting let's read a little bit
further but mathematics must be carefully kept
free from conflicting philosophical opinions
preliminary study of the essential nature of
the concept of number from the point of view
of the theory of knowledge is fortunately not
required by the student of mathematics we shall
therefore take the numbers and in the first place
the natural numbers 1 2 3 etc as given and we
shall likewise take as given the rules by which
we calculate these numbers all right and then
he talks about the system of rational numbers
and the need for its extension all right so this
is quite a discussion of rational numbers and the
familiar story of this number root 2 which is
not a rational number and he gives an argument
for that all right so then he says the above
reasoning which is a characteristic example
of an indirect proof shows that the symbol root
2 cannot correspond to any rational number thus
we see that if we insist that after choice of
a unit interval every point of the number axis
shall have a number corresponding to it we are
forced to extend the domain of rational numbers
by the introduction of new irrational numbers
irrational in quotes this system of rational
and irrational numbers such that each point on
the axis corresponds to just one number each
number corresponds to just one point on the axis
is called the system of real numbers alright now
there's some attempt made at elaborating on what
real numbers are so this is good he recognizes
the importance of this issue and he's now going to
talk about real numbers so our requirement that to
each point to the access additional correspond
one real number states nothing a priori about
the possibility of calculating with these real
numbers in the same way as with rational numbers
so he admits that it's not obvious how we're
going to do arithmetic with these real numbers
we establish our right to do this by showing
that our requirement is equivalent to the
following fact the totality of all real numbers
is represented by the totality of all finite
and infinite decimals alright so his idea is we
are going to establish arithmetic by convincing
ourselves that real numbers are basically infinite
decimals it's a very sensible thing to do really
corresponding to what the scientists do so we then
there's a discussion of decimal number arithmetic
okay there is no mention of any sort of subtle
issues that are like the ones I talked about
when I was talking about the difficulties of
infinite decimals as real numbers but at some
point he says that here we would emphasize the
fundamental assumption that we can calculate in
the usual way with the real numbers and hence
with the decimals it is possible to prove this
using only the properties of the integers as
a starting point but this is no light task and
rather than allow it to bar our progress at
this early stage we regard the fact that the
ordinary rules of calculation applied to
the real numbers as an axiom on which we
shall base the whole differential and integral
calculus now what an important statement that
is okay so he's admitting that there is
some issue about defining arithmetic and
establishing the usual arithmetic for these
real numbers or infinite decimals and he also
says that it's not easy and we're not going
to do it we're in regard to the fact that
the ordinary rules of calculation apply
to the real numbers as an axiom in other
words it's going to be an assumption
and that's really the end of the story
so this is certainly more in the direction of
trying to grasp this important issue putting it
out there thinking a little bit more carefully
about it so you certainly tackled the idea of
defining real numbers basically by infinite
decimals but he has obviously not been able
to actually lay out a systematic definition
with clear theorems and notably he has left
the existence of a valid arithmetic as an axiom
or assumption our next book is one of my personal
favorite calculus books it's one that I think is a
beautiful book it's been around quite a long time
now but still a classic it's calculus by Michael
stivic and you can see it's somewhat frayed nature
is testament to fact that I thumb through it
quite a lot over the years beautiful book so
this is a little bit more of a advanced book that
it aims higher than most calculus books it's more
theoretical it's more inclined towards mathematics
majors potential future mathematicians and Spivak
is also quite concerned with logical structure
he's interested in proofs and careful laying
out of theorems and quite a lot of interesting
problems as well all right so in Chapter one we
see basic properties of numbers and what he does
in this first chapter is he lists properties of
numbers such as the associative law distributive
laws etc the familiar sort of properties but he
doesn't actually say what a number is okay so
it's quite a bit of business here all right so
he's listed these twelve properties of numbers and
then he says what does he say he says it's still a
question whether these properties actually account
for all properties of numbers as a matter of fact
we shall soon see that they do not in the next
chapter the deficiencies of properties p1 - b12
will become quite clear but the proper means for
correcting these deficiencies is not so easily
discovered the crucial additional basic property
of numbers which we are seeking is profound and
subtle quite unlike P 1 2 P 12 the discovery of
this crucial property will require all the work
of part 2 of this book in the remainder part 1 we
will begin to see why some additional properties
required in order to investigate this we will
have to consider a little more carefully what
we mean by numbers okay so this was all very
good let's have a look at the next chapter
the chapter 2 is called numbers of various sorts
and here he starts talking about natural numbers
induction various properties of number theoretical
properties of natural numbers and ok I think there
is some mention of roots and so on but not much
more all right so it does mention somehow though
that there's going to be a part to where it
will be dealing more with these things on fact
we see at the end epilogue there is a section
on construction of the real numbers okay which
is 494 so let's have a look at this appendix we're
going to get at real numbers okay so construction
of the real number is great alright so the mass of
drudgery which this chapter necessarily contains
is relieved by one truly first-rate idea in
order to prove that a complete ordered field
exists we will have to explicitly describe
one in detail and then there's a claim that
verifying conditions one to ten for an ordered
field will be a straightforward ordeal but the
description of the field itself or the elements
in it is ingenious indeed okay so then he talks
about the definition in this box alright so
here's the definition of a real number a real
number is a set alpha of rational numbers with the
following four properties and then he lists some
properties if X is in alpha and Y is a rational
number with y less than X then Y is also an alpha
alpha is not equal to the empty set now if it's
not equal to Q and there is no greatest element
in a in other words if X is an alpha then there
is some Y in alpha with y greater than X okay so
this is definition which is in the direction of
the Dedekind cut which we have not talked about
okay so we are going to talk about Dedekind cuts
and so we're going to flag Spivak that we're going
to have to come back to spit back and see once
we've discovered that whether this definition
of his stands up but it's certainly clear at this
stage that yes real numbers are defined for sure
and whether the definition is satisfactory not
is at this point a question we he'll have to go
through it carefully to see but notice also that
it's actually in an appendix so he's leaving this
difficult question the whole issue to the very end
all right so there we have first glance at some
textbooks let's have a look at some more all right
so let's have a look at some more texts I'm going
to have a look at this book called an introduction
to infinitesimal calculus by GW cot and it's a
little bit older 1914 so exactly hundred years
ago and it's a book that covers functions of
their graphs limits differentiations various kind
basic integrations and then applications to well
various surface integrals polar equations centers
of gravity and so on up to elementary differential
equations so somewhat practically oriented
calculus text and let's have a look in the
table of contents if we can see something where
he's dealing with the nature of the continuum
alright so I can't see anything here let's
have a look just to see in the first few pages
so he starts off in chapter one saying functions
and their graphs constants and variables in any
equation or in any investigation the quantities
which occur are of two kinds those are certain
ones called constants which are generally denoted
by the earlier letters of the alphabet ABC and
so on and those which take different values or
variables generally denote by UV and XY and so on
and okay there's some mention of tans and logs and
square roots and he's talking about transcendental
functions and algebraic functions so I think he
is working implicitly with real numbers but he
doesn't actually spend any time telling us what
real numbers are and just to check we'll go to
the index at the back and have a look under our
and indeed we don't see any entry under a real
number so we can kind of assume that this somewhat
practically oriented calculus text just avoids the
issue altogether so certainly we'll have to say
that the real numbers are neither defined and
certainly the definition is not satisfactory all
right what about the next book which is a well
known book called calculus by Tom apostle okay so
this is a very novel book and very lovely book in
many ways and I have a lot of sympathy for this
book because he starts with the integral calculus
a great place to start in fact his part one is the
method of Archimedes he talks about how Archimedes
and his understanding of exhaustion trying to
calculate areas under a parabola for example is
really a precursor to the calculus that's all
really good and then in the supplement to this
introductory chapter we find a set of axioms for
the real number system all right so let's have a
look at what he's saying so he says there are
many ways to introduce the real number system
one popular method is to begin with the positive
integers one two three and use them as building
blocks to construct a more comprehensive system
having the properties desired briefly the idea
is to take the positive integers as undefined
concepts state some axioms concerning them and
then use the positive integers to build a larger
system consisting of the positive rational numbers
and then the positive rational numbers in turn
may then be used as a basis for constructing the
positive irrational numbers or in quotes or
in parentheses real numbers like root 2 and
pi that are not rational the final step is the
introduction of the negative real numbers in zero
and the most difficult part of the whole process
is the transition from the rational numbers to the
irrational numbers all right so he's identifying
what we have to do so easy going to do it so
although the need for irrational numbers was
apparent to the ancient Greeks it wasn't until
the late 19th century they were introduced and
they mentioned spire straw scattered Dedekind and
the Italian mathematician quiz ma piano and then
a detailed account of this construction beginning
with the piano postulates and using the method
of Dedekind to introduce irrational numbers may
be found in a book by eland au called foundations
of analysis written in 1951 so he makes reference
to construction of the real numbers the point
of view we shall adopt here is non constructive
we shall start rather far out in the process
taking the real numbers themselves as undefined
objects satisfying a number of properties that
we use as axioms that is to say we shall assume
there exist certain objects called real numbers
which satisfy the ten axioms listed in the next
five sections all the properties of real numbers
that we shall use in this book are in this list
or can be deduced from the axioms in the in
this list when the real numbers are defined by
a constructive process the properties we list as
axioms must be proved as theorems and then he goes
on to state field axioms and order axioms and draw
some consequences of that so he's basically saying
that the job of constructing the real numbers has
been done somewhere else and he's not going to
do it he's just going to assume there are things
called real numbers and not going to tell you what
they are and he's going to assume that they have
certain convenient properties that are going to
be then the basis for further work so logically
this fails in my view completely okay there's
neither a proper definition and certainly there's
no definition then just some axiomatic rolling out
of what you'd like to be true certainly cannot be
considered satisfactory on the other hand though
he does at least point towards another text by
Landau called foundations of analysis that we
probably will want to get a hold of at some point
and have a look at and he refers to the method of
Dedekind which we are going to be talking about
shortly all right now let's turn to probably
the most important textbook writer of the 20th
century in mathematics which was Murray Spiegel
who was responsible for the very popular book son
called schaum's outlined books now these are very
practically oriented books loved by students for
many many decades because they're very problem
oriented and practical no-nonsense and they keep
the theory down to a bare minimum and so we're not
going to expect a lot of theoretical treatment
about real numbers are even though it's called
real variables so it's about lebesgue measure and
integration now let's just have a look to see what
our Spiegel does so in chapter 1 he starts with
fundamental concepts fair enough starts with sets
subsets on a page - we see real numbers let's see
what he says says one of the most important sets
for the purposes of this book is the set R of real
numbers it is assumed that the student is already
acquainted with many properties of real numbers
from the calculus this is a more a second year
or third year sort of level a book so anybody
who's going to be studying this measure theory
and integration and some more fancy integration
lebesgue integral will already have to have had
a prior calculus course geometric intuition is
often provided by using the fact that every real
number can be represented by a point on a line
called the real line and then he talks about
intervals and he mentions the irrational number
such as root 2 pi cubed root of 5 and E are those
real numbers which are not rational so there's
really nothing in the way of a proper definition
he does mention a important property which he
calls a completeness or least upper bound axiom
and he says the following axiom distinguishes the
real numbers from any of its proper subsets for
example the rationals and he mentions this least
upper bound axiom ok so it's clear that there's
not a definition and so logical point of view
it's certainly unsatisfactory we'd have to say
and now let's have a look at this very interesting
book called elementary calculus by Jerome Keesler
it's quite a novel book this one and well
worth having a look at because Keesler takes
a point of view of non-standard analysis so he
tries to set up calculus using infinitesimals
infinitesimal x' that Leibniz and Newton and
euler all enjoyed using and tries to look at
these infinitesimally mus rather modern point
of view called non-standard analysis all right
so let's have a look in his first chapter which
reads the real and hyper real numbers we're not
going to say much about hyper real numbers but
let's have a look at what he says about real
numbers so our starting point in this course
is the real number system which is familiar
from elementary algebra well we shall use the
letter R for the set of all real numbers we
think of the real numbers as arranged along a
straight line with the integers marked off at
equal intervals and this line is called the
real line all right so that's all very vague
now he says do not be fooled by the name real
number in quotes the real number system is a
purely mathematical creation which may or may not
give an accurate picture of a straight line in
physical space that's somewhat interesting the
fact is that while our senses give us a pretty
good idea of what medium-sized line segments
are like we know very little about what very
large or very small line segments and physical
space are like on the other hand as far as we
can tell the real line is enough like a line
in physical space for all practical purposes
so what is the real number system one way
to answer this question is to start with
the positive integers and step by step construct
the integers the rational numbers and the real
numbers okay this is a rather long process and
is best left to a later course in mathematics
instead we shall answer the question in a quicker
way by simply listing some properties of the real
numbers these properties will be accepted as basic
and will be called axioms all other properties of
real numbers which we shall need can be proved
from the axioms and then he does the same kind
of thing we seen before a list of axioms like
commutative laws associative laws order axioms
Archimedean axiom and there's our introduction
to real numbers so although this book is very
interesting because it gives us a point of
view of calculus really goes back to 18th
century or maybe 17th century using infinitesimal
it certainly doesn't step up to the plate when it
comes to saying what real numbers really are
I hope you're starting to see a pattern here
right this is a topic which is carefully avoided
by people for some reason a self-evident simple
clear explanation of what real numbers are
and how you do rithmetic with them seems to
be sort of missing hmm I wonder why okay the
next book is calculus of several variables by
Robert Adams okay here it is it's a sort of
elegant little book on a second-year level
so dealing with multivariable calculus
or calculus of several variables and
it's sort of geometrical and if we look
through the contents let's have a look we
don't see anything that's obviously
related to foundational issues and
there's a few appendices but I can't see
anything on a definitions of real numbers
okay so there's mention of Euclidean n space
RN but doesn't seem as if we're going to say
anything about what the actual numbers involved
there are let's just have a check at the back at
the index have a look under are see if there's
anything under real numbers and there isn't one
so I suppose that this approach here is that
well they've already learned what real numbers
are there's no need for us to say anything
further about things okay so this is a very
common game that's played the the introductory
calculus texts we'll say all real numbers are
too complicated we can be done but you'll do that
in a later course and then when the later courses
come around the more advanced courses they will
often say oh you already know what real numbers
are there's no need you know we will just go
on to more advanced things so again the logical
structure is clearly lacking so we're not doing
too well in terms of actually finding out what
real numbers are how you do arithmetic with them
and how you prove the laws of arithmetic all right
so our last set of books are all in the direction
of real analysis and they are more advanced books
typically a course taken by math majors in a third
year junior year at university okay so a first
one called mathematical analysis by apostille does
the same apostle that we had that calculus book of
so this is a more advanced book which deals with
some point-set topology limits derivatives about
riemann stieltjes integrals infinite series and
inner product sequences lebesgue integral fourier
series multiple riemann integral multiple
lebesgue integral and some complex analysis
as well okay so a more advanced book so let's
have a look in Chapter one starts the real and
complex number systems all right this is good so
we gonna have a look so introduction mathematical
analysis studies concepts related in some way to
real numbers so we begin our study of analysis
with a discussion of the real number system that
seems only right and proper several methods are
used to introduce real numbers one method starts
with the positive integers as undefined concepts
uses to build in rational numbers the rational
numbers in turn are then used to construct the
irrational numbers the rational and irrational
numbers together constitute the real number system
although these matters are an important part of
the foundations of mathematics they will not be
described in detail here as a matter of fact in
most phases of analysis it is only the properties
of real numbers that concern us rather than the
methods used to construct them therefore we shall
take the real numbers themselves as undefined
objects satisfying certain axioms from which
further properties will be derived since the
reader is probably familiar with most of the
properties of real numbers discussed in the next
few pages the presentation will be rather brief
so I think this is rather disappointing here
we have a serious book that shrugs off this
very foundational important subject just with
a few lines saying that well you already know
a little bit about them and we're just going to
be concerned with the properties of real numbers
we shall take the real numbers themselves as
undefined objects so we're not even going to
address the issue of what the real numbers are
defined to be so I hope you're getting the idea
here right if there really was a simple proper way
of introducing real numbers ok one that was clear
and logical for sure books like this would
lay that theory out because it's absolutely
foundational for whole subject so apostle goes
on to list the field axioms so along with the
set are real numbers we assume the existence of
two operations called addition and multiplication
so we're not even going to define what those
things are and then we're going to assume that
they obey the commutative laws associative laws
the distributive laws and so on so there's not
going to be any proofs of all the major results
we're just going to assume everything okay so I
really think this is a serious abdication of a
very important responsibility and unfortunately
apostle is not alone in this in this attitude so
we're certainly going to in this case because it's
a serious analysis book we're not even going to
give them the benefit of the doubt any more ok
real numbers are not defined here the definition
is highly unsatisfactory let's go to real
analysis by Royden okay the book there so we're
talking about real analysis ok so this is again
a more advanced topic dealing with lebesgue intro
classical Banach spaces metric spaces topological
spaces measure Theory integration theory Daniel
integral measures outer measures topology and so
more advanced topics in the first chapter called
set theory let's have a look to see if we can find
anything no we can't but in the second chapter
in part one we see a whole chapter called the
real number system alright so this is good let's
have a look to see how Royden introduces the real
numbers page 29 ok a whole chapter on the real
number system axioms for the real number system we
assume that the reader has a familiarity with the
set R of real numbers and those basic properties
of real numbers which are usually treated in
an undergraduate course in analysis the present
chapter is devoted to a review and systematization
of those results which will be useful later
is he going to abdicate as well it looks like
it let's carry on one approach to the subject
of real numbers is to define them as Dedekind cuts
of rational numbers the rational number is in turn
being defined in terms of the natural numbers
such a program gives an elegant construction
of the real numbers out of more primitive concepts
and set theory we shall not concern ourselves here
with the construction of the real numbers but
we'll think of them as already given and list a
set of axioms for them all the properties we need
our consequences of these axioms and in fact these
axioms completely characterize the real numbers
so it's exactly the same kind of inadequate
foundation as we saw in apostle and then there
is a list of field axioms completeness axioms
order axioms and various consequences of them
so basically we're not going to say what a real
number is and we're not going to prove any of the
crucial properties we're just going to assume that
they exist and that those properties are given to
us ok we are not impressed let's have a look at
introductory real analysis here is introductory
real analysis by Kolmogorov and fahman these are
all very prominent to analysts here and these
books have a lot to recommend them as I pointed
out before it's just that when it comes to the
foundational aspects they seriously fall short but
let's have a look at this way so the topics in the
contents are set theory metric spaces topological
spaces linear spaces linear functionals operators
integration measure differentiation ok so let's
have a look at the foundational aspects so
first just some stuff on sets equivalence of
sets yes ordered sets and ordinal numbers ordinal
numbers well maybe we've already gone past the
there's already some discussion of real numbers
here ok uncountability real numbers alright
let's have a look ok so find it in infinite
sets alright so under this section there is
a discussion of countable sets and with the
integers prominently discussed and we have
notion of equivalence sets fine uncountability
of the real numbers okay so theorem 5 so this
appears to be the first time that we see real
numbers the set of real numbers in the closed
unit interval is uncountable ok I've just flipped
through the book and I have verified that I could
not see any prior a definition of real numbers so
this is the first serious mention of real numbers
and it's talking about the set of real numbers
in the closed unit interval is uncountable and
from the description it's clear that real numbers
are going to be thought of in terms of infinite
decimals so it seems as if certainly there's
no discussion of what a real number is there's
just an assumption that real numbers are infinite
decimals and as far as the arithmetic of such is
concerned and any discussion of the foundations
it seems to be lacking let's just make sure and
have a look at the the index for anything about
real numbers and we don't see any index entries
on real numbers so it seems as if this is not
even an issue for the authors of this book
and the last book that I'm going to look at is
a principles of mathematical analysis by rudin
walter Rudin another very nice book all
these books are great books in many ways
alright so don't get me wrong it's just when
it comes down to this issue they necessarily
have to waffle because they have no choice
alright there is no proper theory of real
numbers so there's no way that any of
them can come up with a proper theory
they all have to find some way of circumventing
their way around this huge elephant in the room
okay so Rudin also begins first chapter with a
real and complex number system alright so let's
start an introduction a satisfactory discussion
of the main concepts of analysis must be based on
an accurately defined number concept all right
we agree wholeheartedly with that statement we
shall not however enter into any discussion of the
axioms that govern the arithmetic of the integers
but assume familiarity with the rational numbers
all right that's fair enough I'm happy to buy
that the rational number system is inadequate
for many purposes both as a field and as an
ordered set for instance there is no rational
P such as P squared equals 2 this leads to the
introduction of so-called irrational numbers
which are often written as infinite decimal
expansions on our consider to be approximated
by corresponding decimals alright but unless
the irrational number root 2 has been clearly
defined the question must arise just what is
it that this sequence tends to ah so Rudin is
going to address something here he's going to
he's noting that all right we have this sequence
1 1 point 4 1 point 4 1 1 point 4 1 4 but unless
root 2 has actually been defined there doesn't
appear to be an obvious limit so this sort of
question can be answered as soon as the so called
real number system is constructed alright great
it would be good to have a construction of real
numbers all right so then there's a little bit of
discussion of ordered sets and then feels and the
definitions of fields an ordered field and now we
come to the real field okay so now we can state
the existence theorem which is the core of this
chapter theorem there exists an ordered field
R which has the least upper bound property and
it contains the rational numbers as a subfield
okay so the least upper bound property wouldn't
have to talk about that that is one of the
fundamental properties of the real numbers
that all these sort of systems want to make
sure are in there so the members of our are
called real numbers now what about the proof
the proof of this theorem is rather long and
a bit tedious and is therefore presented in
an appendix to chapter one the proof actually
constructs are from Q ok so he's not going to
construct or approve this theorem directly but
there's an appendix to chapter one where we
are going to find out about how to do that
ok so now here there's an appendix and in the
appendix theorem 1.19 will be proved in this
appendix by constructing our from Q Rudin is
actually going to construct or at least try to
construct the real numbers from the rationals
it's not going to sidestep the issue or point
to somewhere else he's actually going to try to
do it ok so and then there is his construction
which involves step one step two step five up
to step nine ok so it's quite a long involved
argument so this is seriously an attempt Rudin
has actually stepped up to the plate and had
a swing at the ball for sure he gets a tick in
that box what about this question of whether the
definition is satisfactory or not well at this
stage we don't know because we haven't read it
haven't looked at it carefully so we'll put a
question mark here and this is definitely a to
do right we're going to have to deal with these
question marks we're going to have to come back
and look carefully at this and see whether
it actually works or not so his approach is
out of Dedekind cuts and this is the last
sort of bastion or attempt at constructing
real numbers that we have to tackle the theory
of Dedekind cuts as a way of constructing the
real numbers from the rationals does it work or
not well you will not be surprised to hear that
in fact it doesn't work and in our next video
we're going to start to have a look at why it
doesn't I hope you've enjoyed having a look at
these texts with me let me emphasize again even
though I may have been harsh on these texts they
are all really excellent texts otherwise I would
not put them in front of you but we really must
not be shirking from the responsibility of really
pointing out that there are logical difficulties
where there are these logical difficulties okay we
cannot pretend that everything is rosy when it's
obviously clear at least from these examples that
things are not all well and good a lot of these
most of these texts are trying to sidestep the
issue or avoid things one way or the other of
course there are many other possible calculus
texts there are many other possible analysis
texts and I will probably get another stack of
books some time from the library and go through a
similar exercise and show you some more evidence
if you have any favorite books of yours that
you would like me to critique favorite books
that you're familiar with just write them in the
comments and I'll see if I can get my hands on
them and I will point out the difficulties
in real numbers that they share all of the
books will not succeed right because it's an
intractable problem the real numbers cannot
be constructed in the usual kind of fashion so
next time it's Dedekind cuts that will be on
the chopping block I hope you will join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening